[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: And
welcome to "Beyond Belief."
You know, since
the dawn of ages,
mankind has been fascinated
with the unknown,
with the mysteries,
with the occult.
And we've got an
occult historian
with us, Mitch Horowitz.
He's the author of "Occult
America" and "One Simple Idea."
Mitch, welcome to the program.
>>MITCH HOROWITZ: Thank you.
Glad to be here.
>>NOORY: And now, what
does this all mean?
What is the occult?
Let's take a look.
>>What do Hillary
Clinton, Donald Trump,
George Washington, and
Ronald Reagan have in common?
According to Mitch
Horowitz, it's
the occult. Horowitz, the
author of the award winning book
"Occult America," says, not
only was our nation founded
upon esoteric beliefs,
mystical spirituality,
and occult practices,
but the concept
that our thoughts can
change our reality
is a belief as rooted in
American culture as the right
to life and liberty.
As for the pursuit of
happiness, Horowitz
encourages us to deploy the
techniques of positive mind
metaphysics and see how
they work firsthand.
Further, Horowitz explains how
superstitions and other beliefs
affect our lives.
>>NOORY: Occult
historian Mitch Horowitz,
that was a great
introduction about you, sir.
>>HOROWITZ: Thank you, George.
Those are the things I love.
>>NOORY: How did
you get involved
in dabbling with the occult?
>>HOROWITZ: Well, I grew up in
Queens, New York in the 1970s,
and it was a very exciting time.
>>NOORY: That explains
it right there.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes,
doesn't that do it?
The paranormal was everywhere.
You would see astrologers
and robed gurus
on "The Mike Douglas Show."
We would rush home to watch
reruns of "The Twilight Zone."
I would take out all
these books on the occult,
and UFOs, and the paranormal
from our local library.
And it was just in
the groundwater,
and I never lost
my interest in it.
>>NOORY: And when
we say the occult,
some people think you're
talking about a cult.
>>HOROWITZ: Right.
>>NOORY: C-U-L-T.
>>NOORY: We're not.
Talking about something else.
>>HOROWITZ: Right on.
And it's very
important to be clear,
there's nothing
sinister about this.
The occult, very
simply, is the belief
in an invisible world,
an invisible dimension,
whose influences and forces can
be felt upon us and through us.
This belief has always existed.
You find it within
the mainstream faiths.
But when you find it outside
the mainstream faiths,
we tend to call it the
occult. It means the hidden.
>>NOORY: Why do some
people, and so many people,
think it's very dangerous
or it's very evil?
>>HOROWITZ: Look,
it's human nature.
In late antiquity,
the early Church
was in a really historic
struggle with the remaining
order of the pagan world.
The church prevailed and
tended to classify everything
that belonged to the old
world, to the occult world,
as evil or sinister.
We see it happen all the time.
>>NOORY: Much different
than people who are
Satanic practitioners, right?
>>HOROWITZ: For sure, for sure.
My contention is there is no
legitimate history of Satanism
in the West.
To have a tradition,
you need a family tree.
You need a liturgy.
You need to be able to point
to historical documents.
They're really not there.
So my message is that
Satanism is a bunch of hoo ha.
People can call themselves
whatever they want,
but it has no real
tradition in the West.
>>NOORY: Hitler was interested
in the occult as well.
>>HOROWITZ: He was.
>>NOORY: Almost obsessed.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes,
that is very true.
And I always remind
people, though,
that although there was interest
in the occult within Hitler's
inner circle, the occultists,
and the astrologers,
and the archaeologists who
were invited into that circle
were all eventually killed.
They found their way to
the concentration camps
like all the other victims.
>>NOORY: Now, in
our opening, we just
saw Hillary Clinton, Donald
Trump, Ronald Reagan,
all interested,
dabbling in the occult?
>>HOROWITZ: Well, you find the
same percentage of interest
in the occult and the esoteric
among people in power as you
do among everyday people.
So for example, Donald
Trump will tell people
that the most influential
book he ever read
was "The Power of
Positive Thinking"
by Norman Vincent Peale.
That was positive
mind mysticism spread
throughout the
mainstream of America.
Peale, in that book, talks about
some very metaphysical ideas.
He talks about the
magnetic powers
of our mind, the power
of prayer therapy,
how thoughts can actually
make things happen.
And Trump swears by that
book as the book that really
launched him into business.
>>NOORY: Would you call
that occult, that book?
>>HOROWITZ: Well,
I think you could,
if you stretched the definition.
Of course, Peale was a
conservative, Methodist
minister.
He certainly didn't
view himself.
>>NOORY: No, if you told
him you're an occultist,
he'd freak out.
>>HOROWITZ: He would
freak out, but he
did read and had a great deal
of respect for certain people
who came out of the
occult tradition.
Peale's genius was to take
their ideas and reprocess them
through language that the
church-going public could
find acceptable.
>>NOORY: One of my
favorite little books
is called "The Magic of
Believing" by Claude Bristol.
>>HOROWITZ: Wonderful book.
>>NOORY: Super.
I mean, it teaches you
things, gives you techniques.
>>HOROWITZ: That's right.
>>NOORY: Would you
call that occult?
>>HOROWITZ: Yes, I would.
Yes, I would.
Claude Bristol was
a wonderful man.
He was a newspaper
reporter, who dedicated
his life to spreading some of
these ideas to mainstream folk.
He believed in ESP.
He believed in psychical powers.
He believed that the
mind very definitely
has causative
powers, and you don't
need to belong to a religion.
If it's your choice, you don't
need to believe in God in order
to work with that material.
Claude was a wonderful,
mainstream guy,
but he was dealing with
topics from the occult.
>>NOORY: Can you get
in trouble, Mitch,
dabbling with the occult?
>>HOROWITZ: I have
to answer, yes.
10 years ago, I might have
said no to that question,
but the truth is, if you
take out the old Ouija
board or one of these things--
>>NOORY: And that's an
occult apparatus, right?
>>HOROWITZ: Oh,
without question.
It comes out of the age of
spiritualism here in America.
That was the trend of
talking to the dead.
That was very popular in this
country in the 19th century,
and remains so.
When you open a door,
it's like visiting
a website you don't
know online, you
don't know who's there,
where they're located,
and what they're all about.
So if somebody tells
you online to send them
a check so that they can send
you some valuable object,
you better know who
you're dealing with.
And it's the same
thing with the occult,
and things like Ouija boards.
>>NOORY: So the occult can be
dangerous in the wrong hands.
>>HOROWITZ: It can be dangerous.
In the wrong hands,
it can be dangerous.
Although I would argue
anything can be dangerous.
We deal with ethical
judgment calls all day long.
Remember the Reverend
Jim Jones who
coerced his followers
into this mass suicide
in the jungles of Latin America.
He was a Disciples
of Christ minister,
not a New Ager,
not an occultist.
So there are choices.
There are ethical choices that
we're faced with everywhere.
>>NOORY: And I
think he was insane.
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, for sure.
And enormously
charismatic, unfortunately
for his followers.
>>NOORY: So what
creates the insanity?
The occult?
Or were they insane
from the get-go?
>>HOROWITZ: I tend to think that
the great flaw in human nature
is wanting to tell
other people what to do.
And when people find they
have the ability to do that,
they want more,
and more, and more.
So they use whatever
pulpit they have,
whatever position
of power they have,
and they want to expand it.
And in some cases, it goes in
horribly tragic directions.
>>NOORY: Ronald Reagan
and Nancy Reagan
were very interested
in the occult as well.
She probably more
than him, right?
>>HOROWITZ: You know,
they were really very much
a new age couple.
They lived in Hollywood
for about three decades.
Their friends, and neighbors,
and the various actors
and performers they circulated
among, all had new age tastes.
The Reagans were interested
in astrology, numerology,
good luck charms, superstitions.
Reagan would very freely tell
people he had witnessed UFOs,
he had had psychical
dreams, he had
had out of body experiences.
He continued to
talk this way even
on the campaign trail
for the presidency.
Even after he was
elected president,
he was unembarrassed about it.
It just tells you how American
all this stuff really is.
>>NOORY: I could just
see him now saying, well,
there are UFOs everywhere.
>>HOROWITZ: He would
love to be on this show.
You guys wouldn't
know when to stop.
>>NOORY: I was told years ago
that Nancy Reagan consulted
with a numerologist and changed
the address of their house
in Bel Air.
>>HOROWITZ: That's true.
>>NOORY: That's a true story?
>>HOROWITZ: That is true.
Nancy changed the house number
of their retirement home
in Bel Air.
She took this material
very seriously.
She consulted with
several astrologers.
The last one was Joan
Quigley, who died recently.
But Nancy had relationships
with the psychic Jeane Dixon,
and she had a relationship
with an astrologer named
Carroll Righter, who is
not well remembered today.
But he was a man who
lived in Santa Monica,
and he was the first
and only astrologer ever
to appear on the cover of
"Time Magazine" in 1969.
>>NOORY: They seem, in
those days, too, Mitch,
to be really into it.
Now, I know on Coast to
Coast we do a lot of this,
as you well know.
You've been a frequent
guest of ours.
But in those days,
the mainstream media,
the magazines, really
got interested in that.
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, for sure.
>>NOORY: They don't seem
to be doing that today.
How come?
>>HOROWITZ: Well,
it's interesting.
In certain respects,
George, our country
was more religiously
liberal a generation ago.
>>NOORY: I think so too.
>>HOROWITZ: You know, Merv
Griffin had his own house
astrologer, Sydney Omar,
who you'd probably remember.
Sydney was on the West Coast.
He was on "The Merv
Griffin show" all the time.
The Maharishi and
other yogis used
to appear on Mike Douglas
and the other talk shows.
There was a certain
freedom, and I
think we've grown
a little coarser,
a little more brittle
about these things today.
>>NOORY: What
about Jimmy Carter?
What was his involvement
with the occult.
>>HOROWITZ: Carter was
a very interesting guy.
Not only did he speak in a very
forthright way about witnessing
UFOs, but he used
psychical spies
to help locate a downed
Soviet jet in central Africa.
And he spoke very
freely of this.
He told a group of students in
Atlanta after his presidency
that there was, in
fact, a psychical spy
program in the CIA.
Bill Clinton canceled it.
It no longer exists.
It was called
Operation Stargate.
Carter used--
>>NOORY: It was a
remote viewing program.
>>HOROWITZ: Remote viewing.
Carter used three remote viewers
to pinpoint the coordinates
of a downed Soviet jet.
And the CIA was able to reach
that jet before a Soviet rescue
operation did, and they got
some intelligence out of it.
Carter spoke of
this very freely.
>>NOORY: Many of
those Stargate members
have been guests
on Coast to Coast.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
Yes, indeed.
>>NOORY: I'm baffled why
they stopped the program.
>>HOROWITZ: Well, it
was post-Cold War.
They were looking to cut
money wherever they could.
The program was only
funded at $20 million,
which in terms of our
defense budget, is peanuts.
But Clinton probably thought
it was a little bit loopy,
and it was a good
place to make a cut.
I think it's a shame, because
they did do promising research,
and it's very difficult
to make people understand.
Yeah, the American public is
cost conscious, and I get that.
But $20 million is a drop in
the bucket at the Pentagon,
and this was a program that
really pushed frontiers.
The Soviets were doing it,
so we felt we had to do it.
>>NOORY: And why not?
I still think the
Soviets, the Russians,
may still be doing it.
>>HOROWITZ: Oh,
they are, indeed.
They are, indeed.
And they have an
interesting method.
What the Russians
will do is they
will combine
psychical intelligence
with other more conventionally
gathered intelligence.
And they take it
seriously as one channel
of information among others.
>>NOORY: You were mentioning
Donald Trump and his belief
of positive thinking, which
I believed in for a long time
too.
Let's take a look at
what some mainstream
America thinks about that.
>>WOMAN: The power
of positive thinking,
I do believe it works.
I believe because our
body is like a mechanism,
that we can actually
change our DNA,
and we can change our own neural
pathways just by introducing
positive thought into our mind.
>>MAN: Positive energy
is a good thing,
and I feel like it brings
good things around you.
>>WOMAN: Our original
personalities, beliefs,
and souls are based
off positivity.
>>WOMAN: If you think you can do
it, you're much more likely to.
>>WOMAN: Yeah, power
of positive thinking
is like manifesting things
that you want to happen.
So I think, yeah.
I totally believe in that.
>>MAN: I believe that a slightly
positive outlook of life
will allow you to go further.
>>WOMAN: Your attitude
is everything,
and if you say good things
are going to happen,
good things are going to happen.
I don't know where it comes
from, but I think it's awesome.
>>NOORY: Mitch, it's good to
see so many people really tuned
into the fact that believing
in positive thinking
enhances your life.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes, and
just look at these kids.
They're educated.
They're articulate.
They're confident.
They are espousing what is
really the American creed.
If there is one idea
that unites everyone
in this country across the
political and religious
spectrum, it is that
thoughts are causative.
In some way or
another, what you think
has a concrete impact
on what happens to you.
And millions of
Americans believe
this, and with very good reason.
>>NOORY: Positive or negative.
>>HOROWITZ: Positive or
negative, absolutely.
And you can see from
the way these kids
we're talking that they
have thought about this.
They have heard
about this before.
150 years ago, if you told
someone, think positive,
they might have looked
at you a little funny.
But there was a mental
healing movement
bubbling up from New
England here in the US.
And that movement broadened
and morphed into the idea
that there is some kind of
mentally causative power
that courses through us.
That was the start of the
power of positive thinking.
It's mystical,
and it's American.
>>NOORY: You know the
phrase psychic vampire.
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, for sure.
>>NOORY: It's the ability of
somebody, whether they know it
or not, to suck the energy
from people who are near them.
>>HOROWITZ: Now, some
people object and say,
if we think positive, does
that mean we're unrealistic,
or we're milquetoast, or people
are going to walk all over us?
And the answer is,
absolutely not.
The pioneers of
positive thinking,
they were not pacifists.
They were not passive.
You could think of it
as deliberate thinking.
It doesn't matter
where you find yourself
or what you're doing in life,
whether you're an artist,
whether you're a soldier,
whether you're a teacher.
There's a deliberateness
that we can cultivate.
And that's what
positive thinking is.
>>NOORY: Why is it that some
people shroud themselves
in negativity?
Why do they do
this to themselves?
Or maybe they don't know it.
>>HOROWITZ: I think,
secretly, they enjoy it.
And we have to watch for that
very carefully in ourselves.
We like complaining
in a certain sense.
We like bad news.
There's a certain
excitement we get from it,
a certain adrenal thrill.
>>NOORY: Oh, bad
news leads the news.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
Yes, it does.
>>NOORY: I've been in the news
business all my life, Mitch.
Never did we ever start
a newscast by saying,
somebody did
something good today.
>>HOROWITZ: Right, right.
>>NOORY: That's at
the end of the show.
>>HOROWITZ: Right, right.
There's a certain
perverse thrill
we get from the negative.
And it's very important to
watch that in ourselves.
Because if you ask anybody,
they'll say, well, of course
I want to be happy.
Do you?
Are you so sure about that?
Have you really observed
your thought processes,
your relationships,
your choices?
Do you? / I think
it's all up for grabs.
People have to ask themselves
very tough questions about
whether they enjoy negativity.
>>NOORY: You might
be right about that.
Strange things, weird
America, mystical things,
strange symbols, the Denver
airport, where we are.
You walk through
that airport, you
see weird structures, weird
paintings and everything else.
You're from New York.
Grand Central Station,
the train station
is also laden in
strange symbols.
Let's take a look at that.
>>HOROWITZ: Grand Central,
probably the most famous train
station in the world, is a
temple of occult and mythical
imagery.
Cornelius Vanderbilt
owned the land
on which Grand
Central was built.
He was a committed spiritualist.
He told a newspaper
reporter in the year 1870
that if people wanted to find
their way to fame and fortune
as he had, they should do what
he did-- consult the spirits.
When Grand Central Station
was being erected on the land
that he owned, his grandson,
William K Vanderbilt,
who was deeply interested
in the occult and mythology,
helped personally supervise
some of the imagery that
was chosen, including the
beautiful, really iconic statue
of Mercury, which is one of the
largest in the modern world.
So you had this
marriage of interest
in spiritualism,
theosophy, theology,
new forms of architecture,
that were all placing
their mark on Grand Central.
And in many ways, the
great indicator of that
is the zodiac mural
that characterizes
the ceiling of the Grand
Rotunda in Grand Central.
It's the largest zodiac
mural in the modern world.
>>NOORY: How strange
is that, Mitch?
>>HOROWITZ: Isn't it something?
Right there in plain view.
People come to New
York City, and they
say tell me some occult
hot spots I can visit.
And I tell them, Grand Central.
And they're shocked,
because how could
a place that hundreds
of thousands of people
pass through every
week have some sort
of an occult back story?
But it's there.
If you look up at that ceiling,
what you will see symbolized
in the section of
zodiac that appears
on the enormous domed
ceiling is the coming
of the Age of Aquarius,
the so-called Aquarian Age,
which is supposed to be an
era of mystical spirituality,
and education, and
experimentation.
In the early 20th
century, people
like Cornelius Vanderbilt
and artists and others
took very seriously the
notion that humanity was
poised for this Aquarian Age.
It's right there on the
ceiling in probably the largest
zodiac painting in
the modern world.
>>NOORY: By tapping
into this occult world,
what does it do
for an individual?
Does it enhance their life?
Do they become better people?
What happens to them?
>>HOROWITZ: If they're smart,
and if they're sensitive,
yes, it enhances their life.
Because the place that
they find themselves in
is the realization that we are
all receiving and emanating
stations, that our
thoughts really matter.
They're substantive,
material things.
It is equally important,
maybe more important,
what we think about a
person or an experience
than what we actually
say, because what we think
is very intimate, very
emotionally charged, and very
real.
Thoughts are a force, and
people who get into the occult
almost always come around
to that realization.
If they use it well, it
will improve life for them
and for others around them.
>>NOORY: Wiccan is a belief
in a male-female god.
A lot of people have
got them confused
with Satanic worshippers, or
being evil witches and things
like that.
That's changing, isn't it?
>>HOROWITZ: It really is.
And the place where you
can see the change most
is in our own
military right now.
In 2005, the Air Force
commissioned a study
to find out what faiths its
various members practice,
so they could properly
apportion chaplains.
1,800 people in
that Air Force study
listed Wiccan, or
witchcraft, or neo-paganism,
as their religion.
And that was just in one
branch of the service,
and that was just
among the group that
was willing to be
public about it,
because people are sometimes
worried about peer pressure
and such.
There are thousands
and thousands
of practicing Wiccans
in the military.
And thanks to a lawsuit
that was brought
by some folks who were
representing Wiccan families--
>>NOORY: Because people didn't
understand what Wicca was.
>>HOROWITZ: They didn't
understand what it was.
It's a nature-based
religion that
draws upon ancient practices,
believes in a male-female god.
And Wiccan service members
now can get Wiccan symbols
on tombstones or other
official things that
are issued by the military.
Wicca is a recognized
religion in the US military.
And the rest of society is going
to follow the Military's lead.
>>NOORY: Wiccans
are good people.
>>HOROWITZ: Terrific people.
They're beautiful.
It's nature-based.
It's feminine-based.
And I knew when this
lawsuit was brought
the Wiccans were going to win.
You can't tell a service
member, well, you're
serving our country,
but you can only choose
from one of several religions.
They name their religion.
The government honors it.
>>NOORY: You see how things
get blown out of proportion?
>>HOROWITZ: And that's really
the greatest aspect of America.
It's the protection of the
individual search for meaning.
The Military can't tell
you, as a service member,
what chapel you're going to.
You tell them, and they
have to honor that.
That's the greatness
of our country.
>>NOORY: Would you say
that going way back
to the biblical days
of Jesus, that they too
dabbled in the occult?
>>HOROWITZ: Well, the
occult, whether it
has to do with
divination, or talking
to the dead, or the
belief in an afterlife,
it's always going on within
the mainstream faiths, always.
You find astrology
within Judaism.
>>NOORY: It's there.
>>HOROWITZ: Sure.
You find channeling
within Catholicism.
But when it occurs outside
the parameters of one
of the historic faiths, we
tend to call it the occult.
But it's everywhere.
We could call it mysticism,
meaning a direct contact
with the divine.
If we call it mysticism,
you find it everywhere,
but we tend to call it
the occult when it's
outside of one of the faiths.
>>NOORY: Let's go
to some e-mails
that people have
written in on, Mitch.
I'm told that the Illuminati
controls Hollywood,
and that I have seen their
images in Disney films,
and that they control banks.
Is this true?
>>HOROWITZ: Well,
I know this might
turn a few people
watching off to me,
but the fact is, I think
the Illuminati is wonderful.
I love the Illuminati.
The Illuminati--
>>NOORY: Well, why
don't we back up now.
>>HOROWITZ: I'm sorry.
I've got to give
it to you straight.
And so I hope people
will hear me out.
The Illuminati was a group that
was found in 1776 in Bavaria
to celebrate values of religious
freedom, the spiritual search,
the dignity of the individual.
And yes, they did
use occult symbols.
They were a renegade
offshoot of Freemasonry.
They had hoped to infiltrate
Freemasonic lodges
and turn them into vehicles
for Enlightenment values.
Historically speaking,
the Illuminati
disappeared about nine
years after its founding,
because of laws that the
government in Bavaria
passed against it.
But the fact is,
Thomas Jefferson was
an admirer of the Illuminati.
In January, 1800,
he wrote to a friend
that the founder
of the Illuminati,
a Bavarian lawyer
named Adam Weishaupt,
wouldn't have had
to be secretive
if he lived in
the United States,
because in the United States,
all the things that he
was trying to accomplish
were actually legal.
>>NOORY: Were being done.
>>HOROWITZ: So Jefferson
believed, quite rightly,
that the Illuminati
was secret because they
would have lost their
heads if the government had
gotten on to them.
But I truthfully feel that
the historical Illuminati
has contributed wonderful
things to our world.
I don't want people
to be afraid of it.
>>NOORY: Well, you say
the historical Illuminati.
What about the
current Illuminati?
>>HOROWITZ: I really
don't subscribe to that.
I think people are looking
in the wrong places.
They're looking down a
blind alley, quite frankly.
Evil that exists in our
world-- and it is there.
It is there-- it's in the
ways that our institutions,
both private and
public, de-humanize us.
It's what happens when you call
up to ask about a health claim,
and you're put on
hold for 20 minutes,
and then you're disconnected,
and so on and so forth.
There's a lot more
evil in that than there
is in supposed halls of power
somewhere with pentagrams.
>>NOORY: Another e-mail in from
Paul in Steubenville, Texas.
Hi, Mitch.
I was wondering if you
had anything to help
with a spinal cord injury.
Have you ever used
positive mind control
to heal like a spinal cord?
That's a tough one.
>>HOROWITZ: It is a tough one.
It's a very important
question, and it has
to be handled very delicately.
What I advocate is an all
and everything approach.
Get the best in medical
care, whether mainstream or
alternative, your choice.
Pray, surround yourself with
loving, supportive people.
Use visualizations.
Use affirmations.
I believe that
when you're dealing
with an illness or any
other critical life event,
you use everything.
You use medicine.
You use prayer.
You use mysticism.
Alternative, mainstream,
make your informed choices,
but use everything.
So I would send that person
a variety of prayers,
and affirmations,
and visualizations.
Tell him use these
things committedly
and go to the doctor.
>>NOORY: The doctor's important.
>>HOROWITZ: Absolutely.
>>NOORY: You tie that in.
>>HOROWITZ: I believe in a
completely holistic approach,
where you use mainstream
medicine, which
is wonderful in many ways.
And you complement it with
various positive mind methods.
>>NOORY: Mitch, in
our final e-mail,
we have one from Seattle.
It says, I'm a mother
in Seattle, Mitch.
And my high school age
daughter is involved
with Wicca, or witchcraft.
I find pentagrams
on her notebooks.
I was told these
things are evil.
Should I be concerned about her?
>>HOROWITZ: You know, George,
I get this question frequently.
And as a parent of two boys,
I take it very seriously.
And I say this, Wiccan
kids are good kids.
They're sensitive.
They're independent.
They're curious.
No parent who finds
that their kid is
getting into Wicca or
witchcraft should be worried.
It's not evil.
It's an ancient,
nature-based religion that's
experienced a revival today.
It's ethical.
It's socially concerned.
And kids who are
into Wicca I find
to be some of the most
sensitive, most trustworthy
kids you can come across.
>>NOORY: Now, are
all witches Wiccan?
>>HOROWITZ: Well, the term
is used interchangeably.
>>NOORY: Or if you're a
Wiccan, are you a witch?
>>HOROWITZ: Well,
the fact is the term
Wiccan is an old English
term for clever folk,
and it was occasionally
used during the revival
of witchcraft in the 1950s.
But it's become
a term of choice.
Most people who call
themselves witches or neo-pagan
would also say,
yeah, I'm Wiccan.
It's an umbrella
term that's embraced.
>>NOORY: OK, so Teddy
Roosevelt, late President
of the United States, a long
time ago was into Bigfoot.
What's that story?
>>HOROWITZ: The man who
wrote the scariest Bigfoot
story you will ever read.
He was hunting in Montana and
Idaho in the late 19th century.
And his hunting guide, they
were alone just the two of them,
out on the prairie.
Told him a story that
years earlier the guide
and his friend had been attacked
by this upright man-like
creature that
looked like a bear,
but it walked on hind legs.
It killed his friend,
and there were
four different sets of fang
marks on the friend's corpse.
And he told Roosevelt
all about it.
Roosevelt was a very hard-headed
guy, a very skeptical guy.
But he took it seriously
enough to include it
in his hunting memoirs.
And when you read it,
it will chill you.
It's a very frightening story,
one of the first Bigfoot
narratives in American history.
>>NOORY: That's
an amazing story.
>>HOROWITZ: Isn't
that something?
And it comes from an
American President.
>>NOORY: Abraham
Lincoln, his wife
Mary Todd Lincoln, they
were into the occult.
They were into seances in the
White House, weren't they?
>>HOROWITZ: Yes, sir.
Yes, sir.
I have researched
it, and the fact
is, there is concrete evidence
that the Lincoln's had one,
probably two, maybe more
seances in the Crimson
Room of the White House.
Lincoln permitted a reporter
from the Boston Gazette
to be present at one
of these seances.
And Carl Sandburg
and other historians
wondered why would Lincoln
have permitted a reporter
present at something that
you would think could be
embarrassing or compromising?
The fact is, in the mid-19th
century, spiritualism,
seances, talking to the
dead, was very popular
in this country.
And I think Lincoln had a
political purpose in mind.
It was during the
Civil War, and he
wanted to show people,
including in the Confederacy,
that the Commander-in-Chief
was not so encumbered
but wartime command that
he couldn't take a break,
take some time out, and
engage in this kind of parlor
experiment that a lot
of Americans were doing.
It was written about not only
in Boston, but in newspapers
of the Confederacy.
And I think Lincoln believed it
presented him in a good light.
He wasn't completely
distracted with the war,
and he could experiment with
something that many Americans
were into at the time.
>>NOORY: Did he not
have an occult dream
about his own assassination?
>>HOROWITZ: He certainly did.
He certainly did.
Before Lincoln was
elected president,
he had a dream or
some kind of a vision,
where he saw two images
of himself in a mirror.
One image, he was
filled with vigor.
The other image, he
was wan and pale.
And his wife, Mary Todd,
who was very into prophecies
and spiritualism, told
him it was a prophecy
that he would be killed before
the end of his second term.
>>NOORY: And he had a dream
of a body in the parlor
at the White House
surrounded by military guard.
And as he's walking,
in a dream, walking
into the scene to find out who's
in the coffin, he sees himself.
>>HOROWITZ: That's correct.
And he spoke about
these things to people.
He told them to secretaries,
to confidants, to his wife.
That's why it's in
the history books.
Like Ronald Reagan, he didn't
hide this side of himself.
He was very forthright about it.
>>NOORY: Superstitions.
What creates superstitions?
>>HOROWITZ: Superstitions
really tie us
to some of the oldest beliefs
of our ancient ancestors.
The number 13, for example,
in cultures across the world,
from India to some of the
Nordic cultures, to old England,
people have believed that the
number 13 has bad associations.
>>NOORY: I used to run
from that number, Mitch.
Now I welcome it.
I just go right at it.
>>HOROWITZ: The truth is some
people are still so frightened
of it that if you go to a
hotel, a high rise hotel,
chances are there's
no 13th floor.
You find it all the time.
In casinos, in
apartment buildings,
in hotels, a lot of
people just won't have it.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
Let's take a look at
how people out there
in America view superstitions.
>>WOMAN: Am I superstitious?
Yeah, probably.
I think there's a lot
of, like step on a crack,
break your mother's back.
I think there's some
old superstitions that
are ingrained in my body.
>>WOMAN: I do knock on wood
when something bad happens,
just for that superstition.
I think it means good luck.
I just do that.
>>WOMAN: If you say
something that you really
don't want to happen, but
you're afraid it might happen,
knock on wood.
>>WOMAN: Just in case if you
say something and the universe
is out there and hears you,
it keeps your good luck going.
>>WOMAN: I've heard you
shouldn't walk under a ladder,
and I don't remember why.
I'm afraid it's
probably dangerous.
>>MAN: Black cats, makes
me think of witchery.
And they say that's a bad sign.
>>MAN: If one crosses you,
just in general bad luck.
>>WOMAN: If a black cat crossed
my path, I would love it.
>>NOORY: So, Mitch, where did
some of these superstitions
come from?
>>HOROWITZ: It's
really fascinating.
You'll find multiple sources.
For example, we're afraid
of walking under ladders.
Where did that idea come from?
Well, it used to be that in
France, people would sometimes
be hanged, criminals would
be hanged from a tree trunk.
And they would be forced to walk
a ladder up to the tree trunk.
And it was believed that if
you crossed under the ladder,
their ghosts could
be lurking there.
>>NOORY: I see.
>>HOROWITZ: So that's why.
>>NOORY: I thought maybe
somebody walked under a ladder
and a paint bucket fell on
them or something like that.
>>HOROWITZ: It does
seem practical.
It does seem to have
a practical purpose.
But actually, both
the ancient Chinese
and the ancient Egyptians
believed in the sacredness
of the triangular shape.
So there's this notion that
a ladder, forming a triangle,
has some energies dwelling
there that might disrupt you,
or you might disrupt them,
if you pass under it.
>>NOORY: Tossing salt
over your shoulder.
What's that all about?
>>HOROWITZ: Very
old superstition.
Now, we see a painting
that Leonardo da Vinci did
of the Last Supper,
where Judas is
seen to be spilling
the salt. That's
one of many associations.
>>NOORY: Spilling the salt.
>>HOROWITZ: Spilling the salt,
one of many associations we
have of it being bad
luck to waste your salt.
In the ancient world, salt
was a form of currency.
In fact, our term salary
is rooted in the term salt.
So the superstition developed
that if you wasted your salt,
you might be spilling
away your own prosperity.
In old England, it was
believed that a little demon
and a little angel hovered
over everyone's shoulders,
just like you see
in the cartoons.
So when you spill your
salt, you toss a bit
over the left shoulder
to blind the demon.
I do it every day.
I did it this
morning at breakfast.
>>NOORY: In the movie "Dune,"
they talked about the salt.
>>HOROWITZ: That's right.
That's right.
And that was very
historically accurate.
Frank Herbert, the author,
was researching ancient Roman
practices to weave
into the film.
The Romans regarded salt
as a kind of currency.
>>NOORY: Black cats
going across you.
>>HOROWITZ: That's right.
In the Middle Ages, Europe
and England in particular,
was overrun by cats.
There was an epidemic of cats.
And people thought
of them as pests.
Old women, village
women, who were alone,
who were spinsters or widows,
and were sometimes accused
of witchcraft, were friends
to these roving bands of cats.
They fed them, like you might
see someone in the park feeding
pigeons today.
So this belief took hold
that somehow these cats
were the familiars or the
spirit guides of witches.
And people began to shun them.
They were afraid of black
cats, because the devil was
associated with a black dog.
So that belief just traveled
over to the black cat.
>>NOORY: And red eyes.
>>HOROWITZ: Right, right.
>>NOORY: Knock on wood.
You heard the little folks
on the street there talking
about it.
What's that
superstition all about?
>>HOROWITZ: The
superstition is this,
that ancient people believed
that trees contained spirits.
And sometimes, these were evil
spirits or evil fairies that
would play mischief on you.
So if you wanted to
ensure your good luck,
you would knock on wood
to knock out the fairies.
There are some cultures
that still talk
of knocking out the fairies.
I do it to this day.
One can think of it
as a kind of humility,
acknowledging there are
some things I don't know.
There are some invisible things
that are out of my hands.
Knock on wood.
>>NOORY: Rabbit's foot?
Carry it on you?
I can't think of anything
more gross than carrying
a foot of a dead animal on you.
Geez!
>>HOROWITZ: Now there's an easy
one, and a fairly recent one,
actually.
Actors have always been
famously superstitious.
In the 19th century,
many actors used
to carry a rabbit's
foot in their
make up box to use
it as a powder puff.
Well, eventually, we
invented the powder puff,
and people stopped using the
rabbit's foot for that reason,
but they kept it for good luck.
And do you know that when
Franklin Roosevelt was
running for president in 1932,
he carried a rabbit's foot
with him.
And that same rabbit's foot
is on display at the Roosevelt
Library in upstate New York.
>>NOORY: When you think of
it, it really is bizarre.
>>HOROWITZ: It is
bizarre, but people
do these things,
I think, to make
a demonstration of
humility, to say
there's some part of
me that has no control,
doesn't know what's coming next.
And I'm just going
to honor that.
I'm going to acknowledge that.
>>NOORY: How weird would
you look with a human foot
around your neck?
>>HOROWITZ: Pretty strange.
>>NOORY: Very strange.
>>HOROWITZ: And it would
make a bad powderpuff.
>>NOORY: Skull and Bones,
part Yale University.
Evil occult clubs?
>>HOROWITZ: I really
view Skull and Bones
and some of those other
organizations as just
rich kids' eating clubs.
They don't have any
occult content anymore.
They may have at one time.
Some of these groups--
>>NOORY: Or they
may think they do.
>>HOROWITZ: They
They may have taken a
cue from Freemasonry,
which had very good reasons
for using esoteric symbols.
But today, it's just
a rich kids' club.
>>NOORY: Well, Mitch, we just
talked about Freemasonry,
but do they control the
Federal Reserve, the President,
and so many other
organizations and groups?
>>HOROWITZ: Not at all.
In fact, I think Freemasonry
has been a wonderful influence
on this country.
The truth is, there have
been a lot of presidents
who have been Freemasons.
14 out of 44 presidents
have been Freemasons.
The last fully fledged
Freemason in the White House
was Gerald Ford.
Not often thought of
as a mysterious figure.
Bill Clinton did belong to
a Freemasonic youth group.
At one time, Masonry
was very, very important
in the civic, and political,
and commercial life.
>>NOORY: Yeah, they put on the
Shriners Circus, don't they?
>>HOROWITZ: Absolutely.
And they do a lot of
good things for charity.
They have burn centers and
hospitals all over the nation.
Masonry did, at its
inception and still
does, use occult symbols,
because they see themselves
as being tied to
ancient cultures, Rome,
Greece, Egypt, being
tied to a chain
of the search for meaning.
It's not an evil group.
It's a wonderful group.
You could be a Catholic
and be a Freemason.
I have in-laws who are
Catholics and Freemasons.
I'm really hoping that this
chasm between the Church
and Masonry will get
healed in our generation.
>>NOORY: I want to spend
some time on the Ouija board.
Some time ago, I had
pledged on Coast to Coast
to do a Ouija board show.
And we had three guests ready.
We had the Ouija board.
I canceled it.
I have always believed that
the Ouija board is a game.
But in the wrong hands, in
the wrong belief system,
it could be a portal
to the dark side.
What do you think of that?
>>HOROWITZ: I agree
with your caution.
The Ouija board is
a dangerous game,
and people should approach
it with great care.
It grew up in this country out
of spiritualist communities
in northern Ohio
in the late 1880s.
Around 1890, there was a
group of toy manufacturers
in Baltimore who patented it,
and called it the Ouija board,
and the rest is history.
It outsold Monopoly
in the late 1960s.
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>HOROWITZ: Yeah, but
the fact is, people
do have a stream of
very frightening stories
about experiences
with the Ouija board.
People say, for example,
that at first, they
got helpful information, like
where my last car keys are.
>>NOORY: They trick you.
>>HOROWITZ: They trick you.
And then sometimes
they got threats,
and these things were
very frightening.
People sometimes even talk
about physical phenomena
that have occurred
in their own house
after using a Ouija board.
Whatever the case is,
it should be approached
with great, great caution.
Ouija is fascinating,
because it's the only device
that we still use
today that comes
from the age of spiritualism.
But there's a lot of
frightening stories out there,
and I would approach
it with great care.
>>NOORY: What is so
special about it?
Why does it have the
ability to conjure up
spirits, when all you have to do
is sit on the edge of your bed
and go, spirits, come
in, spirits, come in?
Why the Ouija board?
>>HOROWITZ: It's
awfully interesting.
When I was a kid, I
found it hard to believe
that something that came
in a shrink wrapped box
with a barcode on it could
have any occult properties.
And yet, whatever is
happening with the Ouija
board seems to be
summoning up something
that can be very dark.
Now, look, skeptics
will say, oh, people
are just fooling themselves.
They're moving the
pointer themselves.
Let's grant them that for a
moment, just hypothetically.
Let's say that's true.
If that's true, what
are the gremlins that
are hiding in our subconscious?
Because stuff is coming out
that could be very ugly,
that could be very angry.
Or are you contacting
something metaphysical?
Whichever direction
you go in, you're
left with some very
uncomfortable questions.
>>NOORY: Well, then, is it
the board or the person?
>>HOROWITZ: That is
a wonderful question.
It may be both.
I always tell people that when
you engage with a Ouija board,
it's almost like visiting
a website or something
that you've never been to.
You don't know who's there.
How cautious would you be, then?
You should be at
least that cautious
when you're dealing
with a Ouija board.
>>NOORY: Clearly,
the planchette does
move when people are
touching it, right?
>>HOROWITZ: No
question, no question.
I've used it myself, and
I've read all the literature.
And I understand
some people believe
that it's some unconscious
automotive function.
It doesn't seem that way to
the people who are using it.
I've put my fingers
on the planchette.
I've felt the tug.
I've felt movement.
I don't know what it is.
>>NOORY: I'll tell you
my Ouija board story.
Back when I was
doing the Nighthawk
local show in St. Louis, we
did a program on Ouija boards.
And my producer brought
the board into the studio.
And, Mitch, I have never
ever had technical issues
in that studio.
That board is in that studio,
my audio board is blinking.
Something's going wrong with it.
The computer that
played the commercials
is going in and out.
My phone calls from listeners
would snap in and out.
It was the weirdest thing
I've ever gone through.
And I look at the producer.
His name was Howard.
I said, Howard, take this
board and get rid of it.
Get it out of the studio.
Well, all right.
I will.
So he takes it, and takes
it down the hallway.
As soon as he leaves, within
seconds, the audio board lights
come back.
The computer is working.
The phone system's OK.
And I'm sitting there, doing
my show, Mitch, just in awe.
>>HOROWITZ: That's
very interesting.
You know, it was called
the most dangerous doorway
to the unconscious by
the psychic Edgar Cayce.
Cayce and his son Hugh Lynn
felt that the Ouija board
could open some kind of a dark
door, whether it was within--
>>NOORY: A portal, a portal.
>>HOROWITZ: A portal,
whether it was within us,
or whether it was
something that we don't
see in the external world.
And I'm always hearing stories
about how the board can
actually change people.
I was told a entire
story by someone
who was given a derivative
of the Ouija board
to review for a
New Age magazine.
She started receiving
threatening phone calls at work
by this very gravelly,
deep-voiced man.
The police traced the calls.
They found the calls were
coming from her own home.
It was her son who had been
playing with this Ouija board
knock-off--
>>NOORY: Was he possessed?
>>HOROWITZ: And he experienced
some kind of possession
or something, and he was
making threatening calls
to his own mother.
So it can trip a
switch, and it should
be treated very carefully.
>>NOORY: As we wrap up and
we talk about the occult,
I have got to talk
to you about evil.
>>HOROWITZ: Of course.
>>NOORY: Where does
evil come from?
What creates evil?
>>HOROWITZ: That's a
wonderful question.
Look.
10 years ago, if
you had asked me,
do you believe there's
an evil entity,
do you believe there's a devil?
I probably would have said no.
I've changed my mind.
I do think there is a palpable,
actual presence of evil.
Now, I know some people
listening would say, well,
gee, then with all
this occult stuff,
aren't you just
opening the door to it?
We have that choice--
>>NOORY: Maybe.
>>HOROWITZ: Every day.
Maybe, maybe.
But I would venture that
we have that choice,
and we face that choice
every day and all the time.
Evil, or the devil, can
enter into our experience
any time we decide
to degrade or perform
an act of violence,
non-defensive violence,
against another person.
When we gossip, when we take
something that's not ours,
when we're unaccountable, that's
when evil starts to come in.
It can come in
through the occult.
It can come in through
other spiritual practices.
It can come in
through the course
of denying someone something
that's rightly theirs.
We're always facing
these things.
So if you're going to
experiment in the occult,
you've got to have an ethical
teaching at your back.
You've got to read the Gospels.
You've got to read
the "Dao de Jing."
You've got to read one of the
great, enduring ethical pieces
of literature.
Prepare yourself.
It can be wonderful, but
you need moral guidance too.
>>NOORY: You are
preaching right now
to a lot of people watching
this television program.
What do you say to them?
They're at home, thinking
about, hey, you know what?
I want to dabble
with the occult.
I want to do a
little bit of that.
So maybe I want to go out
and get a Ouija board.
What do you tell
them to protect them?
>>HOROWITZ: I would say,
first and foremost, they
need to have some kind
of an ethical tradition
at their back.
The way that you can tell
whether a certain teaching is
steering you in a
good direction is
whether it comports with
great ethical teachings,
whether it's the Bhagavad
Gita, whether it's
the Gospels, whether
it's the Book of Psalms,
you have to have an enduring
ethical tradition at your back.
And I would say, don't go out
and purchase a Ouija board.
That is not where you start.
>>NOORY: Hold back.
>>HOROWITZ: Hold back.
You might want to start with
some of the positive thinking
ideas.
Read Norman Vincent
Peale's book, "The Power
of Positive Thinking."
>>NOORY: Or Claude Bristol's.
>>HOROWITZ: Or Claude Bristol's,
"The Magic of Believing."
Wonderful, wonderful
ethical books.
Those will expose you to
some mystical practices
that you can use right
now in what I believe
is an ethically sound way.
>>NOORY: Mitch, how do people
get a hold of you via email?
>>HOROWITZ: They can go to my
website, mitchhorowitz.com.
I am very easy to reach.
My real life e-mail is on there.
I answer everybody
who writes in.
>>NOORY: Thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief."
>>HOROWITZ: Thank you.
A pleasure.
>>NOORY: You've given
us a great perspective
of what the occult is.
>>HOROWITZ: Thank you.
>>NOORY: And you've,
I think, opened up
a lot of people's eyes.
>>HOROWITZ: Thank you.
>>NOORY: That it might not
be as bad as people thought.
>>HOROWITZ: That's my hope.
That's my hope.
Thank you.
>>NOORY: Well, you
heard it, the occult.
Because you've heard about
past leaders, strange people,
just about anybody who
dabbles with the occult.
It's not as evil
as you might think.
But be very careful of it.
I'm George Noory, and thanks
for watching "Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]